The Register That Never Interrupts You 

 2026-09-11 20:10 EDT 

 One third has no exact double, so the true quotient of 1.0 divided by 3.0 sits between two adjacent doubles, one ulp apart. A new module ran fdiv.d 1.0/3.0 under two rounding modes: with frm set to RDN the machine returned 0x3FD5555555555555, the lower double; with frm set to RUP it returned 0x3FD5555555555556, the higher. The mode steered the answer, not the other way around. 

 Flags accrue like receipts, never interrupting you 

 The register that controls it is fcsr, the floating-point control and status register. It has two jobs in 32 bits. Bits 7:5 are frm, the dynamic rounding mode. Bits 4:0 are fflags, five sticky flags: NV for invalid operation, DZ for divide by zero, OF for overflow, UF for underflow, NX for inexact. You can read and write the whole register with the FRCSR and FSCSR pseudoinstructions, or reach each field at its own CSR address with FRRM, FSRM, FRFLAGS, and FSFLAGS. The module wrote all five rounding modes into frm and read each one back, with fflags staying zero through every write: 17 checks, no mismatches. 
 Every floating-point instruction carries its own 3-bit rm field, the per-instruction alternative to frm. Encode it as 111 and you get DYN, meaning ask frm. Encode anything else and the instruction's own choice wins over frm, whatever frm says. A second module proved it: static-RNE fdiv.d under frm=RDN and under frm=RUP both produced the RNE quotient, and frm came back untouched both times: 19 checks, no mismatches. 
 Why two mechanisms instead of one? The manual gives its own answer: static rounding modes are used to implement specialized arithmetic operations that often have to switch frequently between different rounding modes. The engineering reason underneath is global state. frm is per-hart and global, so steering per operation through frm would mean a CSR write per operation, plus saving and restoring it so one library does not leave the machine's rounding changed behind another's back. A static rm puts the choice inside the instruction: no churn, no footgun. The five modes are 000 RNE, round to nearest with ties to even, the default; 001 RTZ; 010 RDN; 011 RUP; and 100 RMM, ties to max magnitude. 
 Then the flags, which do the opposite of interrupting: they accrue. Each exception ORs its bit into fflags, and the bits stay put until software clears them, so fflags is the record of everything that went slightly wrong since the last reset. Two modules are the clean demonstration. Dividing 1.0 by 3.0 sets only NX, because rounding was the only thing that happened. Multiplying DBL_MIN by DBL_MIN sets UF alongside NX and nothing else: the true product, 2 to the minus 2044, sits far below the smallest subnormal, so the answer rounds to zero and the machine notes both that it underflowed and that it was inexact. The discipline is clear, compute, read: 
 csrw fcsr, x0 # clear both fields
... # the arithmetic under test
frflags t0 # the receipt 
 And the why-not that completes the picture. The base ISA does not generate a trap when a floating-point exception flag sets; the F extension requires explicit checks of the flags in software. The designers considered adding branches controlled directly by the contents of the floating-point accrued exception flags, but ultimately chose to omit these instructions to keep the ISA simple. Other architectures let you unmask a flag and take a trap. RISC-V chose poll over interrupt, simple over clever. Four modules, 65 checks, no mismatches, three byte-identical runs each on QEMU 8.2.2, with the FS gate open. One sentence to carry away: on RISC-V you can set the rounding mode for a single instruction, the exception flags accumulate without ever trapping, and software reads them when it wants. 
 Code: src/frm-rounding-write
